150 million kilometres away in that
direction is the Setting Sun a giant
nuclear fusion reactor he'd put a
million earths inside it now the surface
temperature is only around six thousand
degrees Celsius but the sun's atmosphere
long as it Corona is at a million
degrees and that means it's in the form
of what's known as a plasma soup of
electrically charged particles now some
of those particles are moving around so
fast that they can escape then they
stream away in what's known as the solar
wind they reach the earth traveling at a
few hundred kilometers per second and if
we weren't protected they would strip
away our atmosphere and when the Sun
dips below the horizon there are times
when that protective force field is
revealed electrically charged particles
have been driven away from the Sun
ultimately from nuclear fusion reactions
in the core of a star they cross in the
solar system hitting the Earth's
magnetic field stretching it out on the
dark side of the planet the field then
four snaps back like an elastic band
accelerating all those charged particles
up and down the field lines to the poles
is here in the skies over Iceland and
they hit nitrogen oxygen molecules in
the atmosphere and you see in quantum
mechanics
they're exciting the molecules so that
they emit light in characteristic colors
if you think about it this is the only
time that we really see the Earth's
magnetic field that's one of the reasons
why life on Earth has been able to
persist for four billion years in a
sense that's the reason that you exist
it's Earth's magnetic field that
protects our atmosphere from the ravages
of the solar wind and that protective
shield has its origins deep in the
planets interior thousands of kilometres
down below my feet actually below your
feet now is the Earth's outer core which
is a seething mass of molten iron
convection currents caused the molten
iron to rise then the Earth's rotation
causes it to spiral around now a
spiraling circling flow of an
electrically conducting liquid is a
dynamo the Dynamo generates a magnetic
field and the Earth's field rises up not
just to the surface here but out into
space forming our protective shield and
that what you see there
you